+++
title = "About Me"
date = 2021-03-31
description = """
Hi! My name is Gijs Burghoorn. I am a dutch student at Université Grenoble
Alpes, France, who loves competitive swimming, coaching, reading, contributing
to open-source software and talking about the impact of science.
"""
+++

Hi! My name is Gijs Burghoorn. I am a dutch student at Université Grenoble
Alpes, France, who loves competitive swimming, coaching, reading, contributing
to open-source software and talking about the impact of science. Currently, I am
doing a master thesis microarchitectural emulation.

![Mugshot](../imgs/mugshot.png)

## Studies

Following my high school/college education, I decided to start with a bachelor
of science in the joint computer science and mathematics program. After two
years of following both programs, I had a sense of direction within the fields
and decided to speed up going for a Master. I finished a Master in informatics
in Grenoble, France and started on a Cybersecurity master.

## Swimming

For a long time now I have been swimming both competitively and as a way to
unwind. I love doing both indoor and outdoor swimming and my competitive time
can be found [here](https://m.swimtimes.nl/nl/athlete/386908). I have swam
competitively for [AquaNovio](https://www.aquanovio.nl/) in Nijmegen (the
Netherlands), [ZVL](https://www.zvl-1886.nl/) in Leiden (the Netherlands) and
[AquaMania](http://www.aquamanialeiden.nl/) also in Leiden. My swimming
specialization lays within short distance freestyle.

<img src="../imgs/diving.gif" width="320px" alt="Diving" />

### Coaching

Next to swimming myself, I also coach others. I have been training both junior
9-17 years old) and senior (18+ years old) swimmers at
[ZVL](https://www.zvl-1886.nl/) for 2 years now. Furthermore, I provided the
trainings on land for the university student's water-sports association in
Leiden: [AquaMania](http://www.aquamanialeiden.nl/).

### Organizing

Furthermore, in 2019-2020 I was the secretary while organisation of the SwimIn
Leiden 2020 took place: a open-water swimming competition through the canals of
Leiden. A link to which can be found [here](https://www.swiminleiden.nl/).

## Open source

Open source allows for unrivalled transparency and, although a bit debatable,
trust in the correctness. {{ note(txt="What is open source",
href="https://opensource.com/resources/what-open-source", type="websitesource") }}
Open source also allows people to crowdsource production of products. This
allows individuals to help with disclose issues and make suggestion. My personal
projects are (almost) always open source and I try to help with other projects.

## Science communication

I would say that educating is one of the most beneficial whilst still retaining
a longstanding significance to society. This, together with my passion for
computer science and mathematics, leads me to a desire to educate about computer
science and mathematics topics suited to the public. Especially, the topics with
a greater societal impact are of interest to me. For the past 6 years of my
life, I have been getting education experience in lecturing, one-on-one tutoring
and writing/improving documentation.  Altogether, this has been an extremely
enjoyable experience so far, and I wish to continue on this path.

<!--# Projects

Here are some my projects.

## WasmSVGGraphics

Managing interactive vector graphics in WASM 

## simpleserial-rs

## Honorable mentions-->

# Contact

If you want/need to contact me, you can reach me at {{ mailto() }}.
