+++
title = "About Me"
weight = 1

date = 2021-03-31
+++

Hi! My name is Gijs Burghoorn. I am a student from the Netherlands, currently
studying at Leiden University. I love competitive swimming, coaching, reading
and contributing to open-source software. I have also written a few open-source
libraries myself.

## Studies

After high-school/college I decided to start with a double bachelor's
Mathematics and Computer Science since I am very interested in both subjects.
However, after studying both for two years, I had found the areas I wanted to
continue in and I decided to speed up searching for a Master's. Currently I am
applying to my Master's which is ideally gonna include the security field of
computer science. Other interests within Computer Science include computer
architecture, pure functional programming and vector rendering.

## Swimming

For the past years I have been swimming both competitively and as way to relax.
I love doing both pool and open water swimming. My competitive times can be
found [here](https://m.swimtimes.nl/nl/athlete/386908). I have swam
competitively for [AquaNovio](https://www.aquanovio.nl/) in Nijmegen (the
Netherlands), [ZVL](https://www.zvl-1886.nl/) in Leiden (the Netherlands) and
[AquaMania](http://www.aquamanialeiden.nl/) also in Leiden. My swimming
specialization lays within short distance freestyle.

Next to swimming myself, I also coach others. I have been training both junior
(9-17 years old) and senior (18+ years old) swimmers at
[ZVL](https://www.zvl-1886.nl/) for 2 years now. Furthermore, I provide the
trainings on land for the university student's water-sports association in
Leiden: [AquaMania](http://www.aquamanialeiden.nl/).

Furthermore, in 2019-2020 I was the secretary while organisation of the SwimIn
Leiden 2020 took place: a open-water swimming competition through the canals of
Leiden. A link to which can be found [here](https://www.swiminleiden.nl/).
